---
layout: post
title: The analog frontend of the SDS7102
tags:
- nerdy stuff
- sds7102
- fpga
excerpt:
  A series of posts about reverse engineering the OWON SDS7102 oscilloscope.
  <br>
  This post talks about the analog frontend.
id: 5ba92421-b835-4366-a79a-b6f2eb4d6f22
---

This is a post in a series about me poking at the insides of my OWON
SDS7012 oscilloscope.  You might want to start reading at the
[beginning]({{site.baseurl}}/2016/05/01/sds7102-hacking.html).

I've been home sick from work for a few days and have mostly been
sleeping my days away.  But now I'm awake in the middle of the night
so I thought I'd document what I did last week with the analog
frontend of the SDS7102.

There won't any other pictures in this post so I might as well start
with a gratuitous picture of my desk with my disassembled SDS7102
scope.

![SDS7102 PCB on my desk]({{site.baseurl}}/images/2016-07-15-sds7102-afe/sds7102-desk.jpg)

The metal plate to the upper right is the back plate of the scope
which holds the power supply.  230V can be lethal and it's not
something I want to risk, instead I'm powering the scope with 7.5V
from a bench power supply using two clips on the battery connector.
I've disconnected the display and the front panel since I don't need
them for most of the things I'm doing.

The two scope probes in the picture are connected to a scope which is
not in the picture.  The yellow cable to the upper left has a resistor
on one end with the other end connected to a sharp multi-meter probe.
Hold the resistor against ground or VCC and poke with the probe at an
undriven pin to force it high or low.

I'm using a FTDI TTL-232R-3V3 cable connected to UART0 on the scope.
A bus blaster MIPS is used for JTAG.  The USBee SX is used as a logic
analyzer and is hooked up to the SPI bus.  The reason that half of the
main PCB of the scope hangs outside of the desk is that I have a scope
probe plugged into channel 1 on the bottom which then probes an audio
signal on the RCA cable.  The scope is also connected to the local
network using ethernet.

All of these things are connected to a Linux PC which is not pictured.
This means that I can log into the Linux PC and do just about
everything remotely.  I can power the scope on and off using some
simple scripts that talk to the power supply over a USB port.  I can
connect to the serial console.  I can use OpenOCD to debug the CPU.  I
can use just about any audio application to create a test signal to
measure.  And I can use sigrok to record data from the logic analyzer.

Or I can record data from the logic analyzer once.  The sigrok
firmware seems to be quite buggy and hangs after doing a capture and
the logic analyzer has to be unplugged to restart it.  Meh.  I guess
you can't get everything.  It should be possible to reload the
firmware in the logic analyzer and reset it that way but I haven't
figured out how to do that yet.

The analog frontend
===================

What I wanted to do was to figure out how all the control signals from
the SoC and the FPGA affected the signals from the frontend.  I
rebooted the scope with the OWON firmware and did a soft reset and
load Linux so the ADC would be running.

I already knew that the solid state relays connected to GPA0 and GPD8
on the SoC controlled the AC/DC coupling on channel 1 and 2
respectively, so I haven't even bothered checking that.

By just looking at the captured data I quickly realised that the four
relays near the channel inputs controlled the attenuation.  They have
to be switched in pairs and in opposite directions to work.  GPA1 and
GPA15 are used for channel 1, if GPA1 is high and GPA15 is low it
selects low attenuation, if GPA1 is low and GPA15 is high it selects
high attenuation which attenuates the signal by 10 times compared to
low attenuation.  GPH12 and GPE1 do the same thing for channel 2.

Each channel has a four channel MUX which is used to select a signal
from somewhere in the AFE which is fed to the trigger circuit for the
channel.  As far as I can tell three of the four inputs are all fed
exactly the same signal and the fourth input is fed something that
looks like the output of a differentiator amplifier.  I guess this
could be useful for triggering on the slope of a signal.  Having a
four channel mux to select between only two different inputs feels a
bit wasteful so I'm probably missing something.

The odd relay at the top of the channel 2 shield box is connected to
GPE3 and if high switches the trigger circuits for channel two to the
external trigger input.  This means that it's possible to trigger on
channel 1 and channel 2 at the same time, or on channel 1 and the
external trigger.  The relay close to the external trigger input
switches between low and high attenuation for the external trigger.

The SPI bus
===========

The ADC, the ADF frequency synthesizer used to create the sampling
clock for the ADC, the Rohm DAC and the two LMH variable gain
attenuators for each channel are all connected to a SPI bus from the
FPGA.  I could probably have figured out the configuration for all
these devices by reading the data sheets but I was getting a bit lazy
so I soldered some wires onto the SCK and SDO wires of the SPI bus.
After a lot of curses about sigrok, it had problems keeping up with
the data rate from the logic analyzer and would often stop capturing
and also had to be unplugged after each capture, I finally managed to
capture the all data transmitted over the SPI bus when the OWON
firmware booted up.

I then annotated the transfer log with information about what each
access did:

    24 bits 0x000000c9 LMH
    24 bits 0x000fe100 ADF
    24 bits 0x0000fa02 ADF
    24 bits 0x00020000 ADF? strange value
    24 bits 0x00247bc3 ADF? strange value
    24 bits 0x000000c7 LMH
    32 bits 0x001b89ff ADC reg 0xb -> 0x89ff
    32 bits 0x001a007f ADC reg 0xa -> 0x007f
    32 bits 0x001dffff ADC reg 0xd -> 0xffff
    32 bits 0x001effff ADC reg 0xe -> 0xffff
    24 bits 0x000000d7
    32 bits 0x001389ff ADC reg 0x3 -> 0x89ff
    32 bits 0x0012007f ADC reg 0x2 -> 0x007f
    32 bits 0x001dffff ADC reg 0xd -> 0xffff
    32 bits 0x001effff ADC reg 0xe -> 0xffff
    24 bits 0x00107681 ADF? strange value
    24 bits 0x000000c7 LMH
    32 bits 0x001b89ff ADC reg 0xb -> 0x89ff
    32 bits 0x001a007f ADC reg 0xa -> 0x007f
    32 bits 0x001dffff ADC reg 0xd -> 0xffff
    32 bits 0x001effff ADC reg 0xe -> 0xffff
    24 bits 0x000000d7 LMH
    32 bits 0x001389ff ADC reg 0x3 -> 0x89ff
    32 bits 0x0012007f ADC reg 0x2 -> 0x007f
    32 bits 0x001dffff ADC reg 0xd -> 0xffff
    32 bits 0x001effff ADC reg 0xe -> 0xffff
    14 bits 0x000012a5 DAC reg 2 -> 0x295
    24 bits 0x00247bc3 ADF? strange value
    14 bits 0x000012a5 DAC reg 2 -> 0x295
    14 bits 0x000012a5 DAC reg 2 -> 0x295
    14 bits 0x000012a5 DAC reg 2 -> 0x295
    24 bits 0x000000c7 LMH
    32 bits 0x001b89ff ADC reg 0xb -> 0x89ff
    32 bits 0x001a007f ADC reg 0xa -> 0x007f
    32 bits 0x001dffff ADC reg 0xd -> 0xffff
    32 bits 0x001effff ADC reg 0xe -> 0xffff
    24 bits 0x000000d7 LMH
    32 bits 0x001389ff ADC reg 0x3 -> 0x89ff
    32 bits 0x0012007f ADC reg 0x2 -> 0x007f
    32 bits 0x001dffff ADC reg 0xd -> 0xffff
    32 bits 0x001effff ADC reg 0xe -> 0xffff
    14 bits 0x000012a5 DAC reg 2 -> 0x295
    14 bits 0x000012a5 DAC reg 2 -> 0x295
    14 bits 0x000012a5 DAC reg 2 -> 0x295

I had not hooked up the logic analyzer to any of the chip select or
load/latch signals of the chips so I had to guess a bit about what
each transfer did.  From reading the data sheet I knew that the Rohm
DAC wanted 14 bits of data for each write so those were easy to
identify.  The ADC wanted 32 bits and those were also easy.

Unfortunately the two LMH6518 variable gain amplifiers and the ADF4360
frequency synthesizer all wanted 24 bits and they were harder to tell
apart.  But the high 9 bits of the LMH6518 data should be 0 so all the
transfers of 0xc9, 0xc7 and 0xd7 were probably to them and the rest
would be to the ADF4360.

I wrote my own SPI master for the FPGA which could be controlled from
the SoC.  The first thing I did was to talk to the Rohm DAC.  It was
fairly easy to realize that the bit order of the Rohm DAC was reversed
so I had to reverse all the data I transferred to it.  Why OWON did
things this way I don't know since the Rohm DAC has a pin which
controls the bit order and they could just have set it the other way.
I guess they did it that way do begin with and couldn't be bothered to
change it.  Anyway, writing 0x100 to channel one of the Rohm DAC
produced an output voltage on AO1 of almost exactly 1V, 0x200 produced
2V and so on up to 0x3ff which produced 4V.

Since I could see the frequency from the ADF frequency synthesizer on
with my edge counter on the FPGA I tried to configure it next.  It
didn't work.  I realized that it latched on a different edge so I
changed my SPI master to work with it and finally managed to change
the clock frequency.

I then went on to the LMH variable gain amplifiers and saw that the
amplitude of the signals from the ADC changed when I changed their
configuration.

Finally I managed to configure the ADC.  The simplest change I did was
to switch between sampling one scope channel with both channels of the
ADCs and sampling one scope channel with each channel.  This was easy
to see in the data captured from the ADC.

Then I tried to put all this together and of course nothing worked.
Sometimes I could change the configuration for the LMH amplifiers,
sometimes not and sometimes the ADF frequency synthesizer just went
mad.  I spent a lot of time wondering if my SPI master was subtly
broken.  In the end I realised that the different chips all have
different requirements on clock polarity (CPOL) and which edge data
should be changed on (CPHA) and how the chip select or load/latch
signals should look.  [Read here for more on the different SPI
transfer modes](http://dlnware.com/theory/SPI-Transfer-Modes).

I rewrote the SPI master completely so that it had some configuration
bits for CPOL, CPHA and the chip select or latch/load signals which
could be set per transfer and this finally made everything work.  I
could finally change the gain of the LMH amplifiers, switch the
frequency of the ADF frequency synthesizer and change the ADC
configuration.  Success.

I also found out that the first write of 0x000000c9 wasn't to the LMH,
it's to the ADF frequency synthesizer.  And that some of the writes
I've labeled as ADF don't look correct, the values are just strange.

Then the ADC stopped working.  After spending too much time looking at
my FPGA code I found out that the wire I had soldered from the logic
analyzer to a resistor from the SCK line to the ADC had pulled so hard
on the joint that it had broken the surface mount resistor.  Oops.
Luckily enough it was easy to desolder the resistor and replace it
with a new one.

Back to the analog frontend
===========================

The outputs from the two trigger MUXes are fed to the two inputs on a
dual PECL comparator.  After probing around a bit I could see that AO1
and AO2 from the Rohm DAC ended up as the reference voltages for the
comparators.  So that's how you set the trigger voltage.  Nice.

I was unable to find out what the other channels from the DAC are used
for.  Most strangely, none of them affect the vertical position of the
signal in the captured data from the ADC.  Something is not right
here.

After a lot of head scratching I realised that the mystery chip U16
had a couple of analog voltages on pin 3 and 4.  It must be a DAC of
some kind.  When I searched for D32E+DAC I immediately found the page
for the [TI DAC8532 16-Bit, Dual Channel, DAC](http://www.ti.com/product/DAC8532) and the pinout matched.  Why on
earth didn't I find it before?  I must have been blind.

This also explains the writes of strange values to the ADF4360 in the
SPI transaction log above.  They were writes to the DAC8532.  After
forcing the chip select pin of the DAC8532 low and looking for edges
on the FPGA I found that it was connected to pin A8 on the FPGA.  I
added support for the new chip select in my SPI master and, yes!  I
was able to change the output voltage of the DAC and this also changed
the vertical position of the signals from the two scope channels.
Probing the U3 OP-AMP below the DAC8532 is used to scale/shift the
voltage and increase the drive capability of the DAC.  That's one
mystery solved.

As far as I can tell only 2 out of the 10 outputs of the Rohm DAC are
used.  This seems a bit wasteful, why not use a cheaper 2 channel DAC
of only 2 channels are needed.  I must be missing something here too.

Where were I?  Yes, triggering.  When looking at a 3 kHz sine wave on
channel 1 I could see that pin D5 on the FPGA was changing at 3kHz.
Doing the same thing for channel 2 would make T12 switch.  The strange
thing is that this signal did not come from the PECL comparator.  If I
changed the trigger voltage from the Rohm DAC so that the PECL output
would stop switching I still saw 3kHz on the FPGA pins.  Huh?

I had all forgotten about the Rohm BA7046 video SYNC separators.
There were two chips, U34 and U35, one for each channel that I hadn't
figured out what they were doing yet.  It turns out that they are also
fed from the trigger MUXes for each channel.  And when a BA7046 is fed
a 3kHz sine wave it will output a 3kHz square wave on the vertical
sync (Vd) output and a 17-18kHz square wave on the horizontal sync
(Hd) output.  And those were the 3kHz seen on D5 and T12 and 17-18kHz
seen on R12 and E6.

But what about the PECL comparators?  I had located all but four pins
on the FPGA and those pins were not differential pairs so they could
not be fed the signals from the PECL comparator directly.  I could not
find any other ICs that could do a PECL to single ended conversion and
none of those remaining four pins on the FPGA were toggling anyway.
How can this work?

I went to bed a bit frustrated.  I was this close to knowing
everything there is to know about how the scope is put together and
was stumped on this last little tiny thing.

[When the light went on it nearly blinded
me](http://www.catb.org/jargon/html/story-of-mel.html).  I had messed
up the location of a FPGA pin before, hadn't I?  What if I had done it
more than once?  What if the to differential outputs from the PECL
comparator were actually connected to two differential inputs of the
FPGA?  The PECL signal levels are so high that both a low and high
PECL level will look like a high signal to the FPGA and they have to
be measured differentially to show any toggling.

Of course.  I had put down B6 as the pin for the SDA line to the
AT88SC CryptoMemory.  It was actually part of the B6/A6 pair connected
to the channel 1 differential output from the PECL comparator and
C9/A9 was connected to the channel 2 output.  The AT88SC SDA was
actually on C5.  With this change I could finally see 3kHz on both
pairs of pins on the FPGA and could make them stop switching by
changing the trigger voltages from the Rohm DAC.  Doh.

Success?
========

I'm done.

I have discovered almost everything there is to find out about the
scope.  I know what every single pin on the FPGA does and what most of
pins on the SoC do.  I know how the analog frontend works, I can
control the attenuation, gain, levels, triggers and sampling frequency
and can capture samples from the ADC.

Ok, there are few things such as why they are using a 10 channel DAC
or 4 channel MUX when they only use 2 channels.  There is one pin,
GPB6, on the SoC that keeps changing every now and then and I have no
idea why it does that.

This means that I've probably missed something.

But I know enough about how the scope fits together that I should be
able to actually write a new firmware for it from scratch.  It may be
hard to get the fast DDR bus between the SoC and FPGA to work, and it
may be hard to make the DDR memory connected to the FPGA work since it
breaks the Xilinx MIG design rules, but it should be possible.

There's a big risk that I won't do that though.  Most of the the fun
with this has been to figure out how everything works.  To actually
write a polished GUI for a scope and all the small pieces that are
needed isn't quite as fun.

But I'm going on vacation in august and if it rains a lot I might get
a bit bored.  Who knows. :-)

Update: [I've put the source code for my Linux port and FPGA image on
github]({{site.baseurl}}/2016/07/16/sds7102-source.html).
